JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
private U.S.
company makes history by being
the first to
land a reusable rocket
vertically after launching
into orbit.
Also ahead this Tuesday: a
report card for
the U.S. looking back at how the
country has
handled some of the year's
biggest events,
from the Iran nuclear deal to
terrorist attacks.
And the emerging danger of
synthetic drugs
and who is at risk.
MOLLY, Used Synthetic Marijuana:
I remember,
I woke up in the hospital. My
throat hurt
so bad. And I was like, why is
my throat hurting?
And it was because they had to
put a tube
down my throat because I
couldn't breathe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Iraq, army
units advanced
deep into Ramadi today, in a bid
to recapture
the key city from Islamic State
control. It's
the latest push in a slow-moving
offensive.
ISIS captured Ramadi last May,
striking a
blow at the Baghdad government.
The city is
capital of Anbar province, the
country's Sunni
heartland. Iraqi officials
reported sporadic
fighting today in the city
center.
In Afghanistan, Taliban fighters
pressed beleaguered
Afghan forces in a crucial
southern province.
The government sent
reinforcements and Britain
sent military advisers.
Alex Thomson of Independent
Television News
has the story.
ALEX THOMSON: Fighting even
around Lashkar
Gah, the capital of Helmand
Province. Reports
differ, but there is no doubt
that insurgents
have come close to ousting the
Western-backed
Afghan army from the town of
Sangin.
MERZA KHAN RAHIMI, Helmand
Governor (through
translator): We are assessing
the situation
and sending supplies to the
security forces.
If there is any failure, then
the Ministry
of Defense, the Interior
Ministry, the National
Directorate of Security and
Security Council
have a special agenda to solve
it.
ALEX THOMSON: This is now a
military and political
crisis for Afghanistan and NATO.
Things got
so bad, a key Sangin official
put his career
on the line and took to Facebook
on Sunday,
writing to the Afghan president:
"I know that
bringing up the issue on social
media will
make you very angry. But Helmand
stands on
the brink. Ninety men have been
killed in
Gereshk and Sangin districts in
the last two
days."
Tonight, the strategic road to
the Kajakai
Dam from Sangin is cut, so too
routes to other
key areas across Helmand
Province. Ten British
advisers have flown now to
Helmand to advise
the Afghans, but they're miles
away from the
fighting, U.S. and U.K. special
forces also
reportedly there, very rather
closer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today, a
U.S. Army sergeant
accused of deserting in
Afghanistan was arraigned
before a military judge. Bowe
Bergdahl faces
charges for walking off his post
in 2009.
He was captured by the Taliban,
and finally
released in a prisoner swap last
year. Bergdahl's
appearance today came in a brief
hearing at
Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
An Army spokesman summed up
afterward.
COL. DANIEL KING, U.S. Army: The
judge explained
Sergeant Bergdahl's right to be
tried before
a panel or a military judge. The
judge also
inquired if Sergeant Bergdahl
wished to enter
any motions or a plea at this
time. Sergeant
Bergdahl deferred all of these
decisions to
a later hearing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bergdahl could
get life in
prison if he's convicted at a
general court-martial.
The first body has been pulled
from the muddy
rubble of a landslide disaster
in Southern
China. Search teams in Shenzhen
found the
remains today, and continued
hunting for at
least 70 people still missing. A
wave of earth
and construction waste swallowed
33 buildings
on Sunday, despite longstanding
warnings the
site posed a threat.
Europe's migrant crisis reached
a staggering
record today. The
director-general of the
International Organization for
Migration announced
the new numbers in Geneva.
WILLIAM LACY SWING,
Director-General, International
Organization for Migration: We
have just published
the figures of the one --
passing the one
million mark for the number of
refugees and
other migrants heading north
into Europe,
primarily out of Syria, but
other areas also,
and of that number, the death
total is very
close to 3,700.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just today, 11
more people
drowned when a boat carrying
migrants to Greece
sank off the western coast of
Turkey. Seven
others were rescued by the
Turkish coast guard.
And Wall Street moved higher for
a second
day, as oil prices rose. The Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 165 points to
close at 17417.
The Nasdaq rose 32, and the S&P
500 added
nearly 18.
Still to come on the "NewsHour,"
a first in
commercial space exploration; no
indictments
in the Sandra Bland case; a
review of the
year in U.S. foreign policy; and
much more.
in the Sandra Bland case; a
review of the
year in U.S. foreign policy; and
much more.
It's been a long time since a
rocket's descent
has been big news, but, last
night, there
was a historic landing. After
SpaceX, a private
company founded by Elon Musk,
launched a rocket
on Monday from Cape Canaveral in
Florida,
it stuck the landing, you might
say. The rocket
booster landed gently on Earth,
a feat cheered
at SpaceX headquarters, and that
suggested
we may be able to create
reusable rockets
to explore further.
Our science correspondent, Miles
O'Brien,
joins me now.
Welcome, Miles.
So, how big a deal is this?
MILES O'BRIEN: Judy, this is the
Holy Grail
for space.
Ever since the space age began,
those of us
who cared about exploring beyond
have thought,
wouldn't it be nice if we could
reuse the
craft? We have been throwing
them away virtually
the whole time. The space
shuttle was an attempt
to make it reusable. Didn't work
out so well.
And so the idea that you could
take the first
stage of a rocket, kind of the
money end of
the rocket, if you will, and
have it land
intact gently to be fueled up,
gassed up and
launched again is truly a great
moment. So,
yes, big deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why was it so
hard to do before
now?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, part of it
is, we didn't
try for a long time. During the
heady days
of the space race, we were too
busy trying
to beat the Soviets to the
surface of the
moon, and so we were very happy
just to throw
things away, rather than try to
figure this
out.
There is a penalty. You have to
have extra
fuel on obviously to bring it
down safely.
Then we got kind of off on a
tangent with
the space shuttle, thinking that
would be
reusable, and that didn't work
out so well.
So we sort of didn't think about
it.
Then we went in the wrong
direction. And now
with entrepreneurs like Elon
Musk and Jeff
Bezos looking at this idea in a
more bottom-line
manner than NASA would, dare I
say, we might
get some progress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, now, does
this mean it's
easy to do that, to land a
rocket back on
Earth?
MILES O'BRIEN: Nothing in space
is easy.
And this is like balancing a
broom pole on
your nose, and only harder, lots
harder. So,
yes, it's been proven now. The
trick is, if
you really want to make it
cost-effective,
you have to do this a lot,
because, frankly,
if you're only going to launch a
few times
a year, you might as well just
throw away
the pieces.
But if you're really going to
ramp up and
think about accessing space on a
routine basis,
having reusable first stages,
having reusable
pieces of these rockets really
becomes a game-changer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So what does it
mean for the
future of spaceflight? What does
this mean
that can now be attempted that
looked a little
farther off in the future until
now?
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes, well, this
will -- look,
on the big picture here, what
we're seeing
here is low Earth orbit changing
dramatically.
It's not unlike what happened
with the Internet,
built by the government, handed
over to Silicon
Valley, and, poof, we get
Facebook and Instagram.
Kind of like that anyhow.
Now what we're seeing in space
is, NASA is
stepping out of low Earth orbit
and is handing
over that domain to the likes of
Elon Musk
and Jeff Bezos and Richard
Branson, who are
trying to make businesses out of
this. And
that's exciting. It means NASA
can use its
limited resources to do what it
should do,
go over the hill to the next
horizon. In this
case, I would like to see them
go to Mars.
And that's where they say
they're headed.
They need the funding to do
that. They need
the focus. And they don't need
to be spending
a lot of time flying taxis and
freighters
into low Earth orbit. Instead,
there are private
companies that are willing to do
it, and they're
doing it faster, better and
cheaper.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you mentioned
these other
entrepreneurs who are trying,
Jeff Bezos,
who has his own company. They
landed -- I
guess they landed a rocket
recently had been
in suborbital -- had been in
suborbit, whatever
the term is, but -- so you have
this competition.
What does that mean for the
future? Does that
mean we're likely to see more
attempts like
this?
MILES O'BRIEN: Competition is
always good.
It's what got us to the moon,
after all.
When we lost that space race,
NASA kind of
got lost in space, if you will.
Now that we
have viable, private enterprise
competing
and getting into Twitter wars
over who is
doing a better job of it,
frankly, which is
very entertaining to see
billionaires go at
it on Twitter, when you see that
kind of thing,
that's really exciting. That
means that there
might be a real business here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Suborbital flight
was what
I was trying to say.
Miles O'Brien, space is getting
exciting all
over again.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes, indeed,
suborbital or
orbital, Judy.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's turn once
again to the
national conversation around
policing, criminal
justice and race.
The latest development of note:
a decision
by a grand jury in Texas not to
indict anyone
yet in connection with the death
of an African-American
woman while she was in custody.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
DARRELL JORDAN, Prosecutor: This
case is very
big for the citizens of Waller
County. It
is even bigger for the family of
Sandra Bland.
JEFFREY BROWN: Prosecutor
Darrell Jordan speaking
last night.
DARRELL JORDAN: We have left no
rock unturned.
And the grand jury, anything
that they have
asked for, we have done our best
to get it
to them.
JEFFREY BROWN: That grand jury's
decision
effectively cleared sheriff's
officials and
jail employees of criminal
wrongdoings in
Bland's death. As captured on
video, the Chicago-area
woman was pulled over by a Texas
state trooper
in July for making an improper
lane change.
It quickly turned into a
confrontation, as
Bland refused to get out of her
car, and trooper
Brian Encinia brandished a stun
gun.
BRIAN ENCINIA, Texas State
Trooper: Get out
of the car! I will light you up!
Get down!
SANDRA BLAND, Arrested: Wow.
JEFFREY BROWN: Bland remained in
jail when
she could not raise $500 dollars
bail, and
three days later, her body was
found hanging
in her cell. The local medical
examiner called
it a suicide, but the family
rejected that
finding. And shortly before
yesterday's decision,
Bland's family charged the grand
jury was
a -- quote -- "sham proceeding."
GENEVA REED-VEAL, Mother of
Sandra Bland:
It's the secrecy of it all. I
can't even begin
to tell you what's going on,
because I myself
don't even know what's going on,
to not have
my counsel be privy to any of
this evidence
that is being presented.
JEFFREY BROWN: There've been
similar outcomes
in several similar cases,
including Michael
Brown's death in Ferguson,
Missouri, where
a grand jury refused to indict a
white policeman,
plus the Eric Garner choke hold
death on Staten
Island New York. Again, a grand
jury decided
not to indict a white officer.
And last week, a Baltimore judge
declared
a mistrial for the first officer
charged in
Freddie Gray's death in custody.
Back in Texas,
the prosecutor in the Bland case
says the
grand jury will reconvene next
month to consider
-- quote -- "other issues,"
possibly including
charges against the trooper.
And we get some further
reporting on the Sandra
Bland case and reactions to it
now from Molly
Hennessy-Fiske, Houston bureau
chief for The
Los Angeles Times.
Molly, welcome back to the
program.
There's a lot here that we don't
know exactly
-- including exactly what the
grand jury was
looking at, right?
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE, The Los
Angeles Times:
That's right.
The evidence presented to the
grand jury,
what the special prosecutor said
-- there's
a team of about five special
prosecutors,
independent prosecutors who have
been appointed
to present the evidence to the
grand jury.
I spoke to some of them, and
they said they
could share some information,
but they couldn't
address specifics.
JEFFREY BROWN: The special
prosecutor said
the grand jury will reconvene in
January,
so what do we know about what
they will look
at then?
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE: Well, they
did say yesterday
after meeting all day for the
third time in
six weeks, the special
prosecutors came out
late in the evening and said
that there would
be no indictments returned
against the Waller
County Sheriff's Office or the
jail where
Sandra Bland was held and where
her body was
found in her jail cell.
But they said that the grand
jury wanted to
continue meeting, to continue
investigating,
and they will reconvene January
6. I asked
them specifically whether they
would be addressing
the trooper who stopped Sandra
Bland, that
original traffic stop that
resulted in her
arrest and her being take to the
jail. They
wouldn't respond directly to
address that.
That's one of the specifics that
they said
they couldn't discuss. But it is
one of the
matters that's still
outstanding.
JEFFREY BROWN: And I gather that
supporters
of Sandra Bland are now
preparing or now calling
for federal -- a federal role in
all of this.
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE: That's
right.
Today, they called a meeting in
front of the
Waller County courthouse, which
is where the
grand jury had been meeting
previously. The
supporters gathered there urge
and I talked
to them ahead of time. They said
that they
planned to ask for the Justice
Department,
the federal government to get
involved and
have their own independent
investigation,
because they said they don't
trust the local
officials, the grand jury, as
well as those
who are investigating the case.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Molly
Hennessy-Fiske,
the Houston bureau chief of The
Los Angeles
Times, thanks so much.
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE: Thanks for
having me.
And we broaden the discussion
further now
with Brittany Packnett, an
organizer of Campaign
Zero, a group advocating for
police reform,
and Heather Mac Donald, a fellow
at the Manhattan
Institute, a policy think tank.
I want to welcome both of you.
I want to start with you,
Brittany Packnett,
starting with Sandra Bland to
get a quick
reaction. Were you surprised by
the grand
jury's decision?
BRITTANY PACKNETT, Ferguson
Commission Member:
I'm sadly not surprised. As an
activist and
protester from Ferguson and also
as a black
woman myself who videotapes
every single police
encounter that I have when I'm
pulled over,
because I live in that amount of
fear, I'm
sadly not surprised.
And there are millions of
Americans not surprised
by this outcome, and that should
concern us
all.
JEFFREY BROWN: Heather Mac
Donald, your reaction?
HEATHER MAC DONALD, Manhattan
Institute: Well,
there was no evidence that this
was a homicide,
Jeffrey. This was a suicide, and
it's a tragic
case. It's heartbreaking that
Sandra Bland
has died, but I don't know of
any evidence.
The coroner found that this was
a suicide.
Whether there was negligence on
the part of
the jail officials in not
keeping a close
enough suicide watch on Ms.
Bland, who reported
that she had recently tried to
commit suicide
because of a miscarriage, that
remains to
be seen, but I don't think
there's any evidence
of criminal wrongdoing here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Each case, of
course, has its
own specifics.
But, Brittany Packnett, you're
saying you're
not surprised because you see a
larger pattern
here?
BRITTANY PACKNETT: Absolutely.
Over 1,000
people are killed each year by
police officers
in this country, and this year
alone 14 police
departments killed black people
exclusively.
And so we see this trend
happening every single
day. And I find it fascinating
that black
women can be forthright on
reality television
and it's entertaining, but when
we're forthright
in our matters of constitutional
rights and
self-protection, it can be
deadly, as it was
in Sandra Bland's case.
At the very least, we need to be
looking at
the kinds of psychological
damage that she
suffered at the hands of what
happened to
her, both during her arrest and
during her
jailing, and, quite frankly, she
never should
have been arrested in the first
place.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why do you think
-- let me
just stay with you, Brittany
Packnett. Why
do you think these indictments
are hard to
get?
BRITTANY PACKNETT: I believe
these indictments
are hard to get because there is
a systemic
issue at play.
We have evidence of that
systemic issue. We
have done that research at
Campaign Zero.
We continue to see evidence that
the criminal
justice system
disproportionately jails black
and brown people in the issue of
mass incarceration.
And so we know that this system
was never
built for folks like us. And we
know that
it continues to prevail against
us.
And so the reason why this can
continue is
because the system has never
stopped it.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, so
Heather Mac Donald,
what's your response to that? Do
you see a
systemic issue here or a case by
case?
HEATHER MAC DONALD: If this is
an example
of an indictment that somehow
should have
been brought against the police
officer for
murder, that's ridiculous.
That explains why there aren't
many indictments
of police officers for murder.
This officer,
Encinia, was clearly not fit
psychologically
for the force. He lost it. He
completely lost
his cool when he was faced with
alleged contempt
of cop, but he's not responsible
for the death
of Sandra Bland. This was a
suicide.
The causal reasoning here is so
remarkably
attenuated. Yes, blacks are
over-represented
in the prison population, but
study after
study has shown that that is
completely a
function of their elevated rates
of black
crime. If we want to save black
lives, which
we all should, the best thing to
do is to
support the police, who have
been responsible
for a 50 percent drop in
homicides over the
last 20 years, the main
beneficiaries of which
have been law-abiding black
residents of inner-city
neighborhoods.
JEFFREY BROWN: Are you arguing,
Heather Mac
Donald, that the justice system
is working
as it should in these cases?
HEATHER MAC DONALD: I am arguing
that.
In this case, I don't see any
sign of a miscarriage
of justice. What we need to be
focusing on
is the six -- every day, 16
blacks are killed.
They're not killed by white
civilians. They're
not killed by the cops. They're
killed by
gun violence.
In September, three children
under the age
of 5 were killed in Cleveland,
leading the
police chief there to beg in
tears for attention
to what's happening in the
streets.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
HEATHER MAC DONALD: In
Cincinnati in July...
BRITTANY PACKNETT: I would like
to respond
to that.
HEATHER MAC DONALD: ... two
children were
killed.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Brittany Packnett.
BRITTANY PACKNETT: I would like
to respond
to that. Thank you.
So, what we know is that gun
violence absolutely
presents tragedies every single
day, but if
black lives really matter to
people like Heather
Mac Donald and other people who
insist that
black-on-black crime is the real
issue, then
pay attention to poverty, pay
attention to
issues of education, and pay
the fact that, according to the
research we
have analyzed at Campaign Zero,
there is no
correlation between community
violence and
police violence.
In fact, in many departments
where there have
been a high incidence of police
violence,
there's been a low incidence of
community
violence, and the opposite can
be said of
many other departments. So we
actually see
no correlation between those
things.
At the end of the day, we know
police violence
is not the only thing plaguing
our communities.
However, police violence is what
has killed
Sandra Bland. And she never
should have been
arrested in the first place.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Heather Mac
Donald, respond
to that, that she's pulling
apart the argument
that you just made, that one
thing can exist,
but there can also be -- there
can also be
what she's talking about.
HEATHER MAC DONALD: Police
violence didn't
kill Sandra Bland. This was a
police stop
for a driving infraction that
went horribly
awry, but Sandra Bland committed
suicide three
days later.
There is simply no causal
connection between
officer Encinia and Sandra
Bland's death,
as horrible as Sandra Bland's
death is and
as tragic a loss to her family.
The nation
spends $1 trillion a year on
inner-city communities
and trying to uplift people from
poverty.
That has not worked. What has
worked is proactive
policing, and the police are not
racist. There
have been some horrible
individual instances
in this last year, but that is a
drop in the
bucket compared to the daily
violence that
is taking black lives.
JEFFREY BROWN: We just have less
than a minute.
Brittany Packnett, I just want
to ask you,
in the Sandra Bland case, there
are now calls
for a federal role. Do you think
that -- it's
important? Would that make a
difference?
BRITTANY PACKNETT: I think
that's absolutely
essentially.
And I think we can't get away
from the basic
fact that if officer Encinia
hadn't been confrontational
with Sandra Bland and had not
arrested her
for failing the use a traffic
signal, she
wouldn't be dead. So, to say
that there is
no causal relationship is simply
inaccurate.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, very
briefly, Heather
Mac Donald, what do you think
about the federal
role?
HEATHER MAC DONALD: I think it's
completely
unnecessary here.
There's no sign of a pattern of
practice in
this case of civil rights
violations. It's
-- there's simply not any kind
of legal case
for causation here on the part
of officer
Encinia or the police department
or highway
patrol from which he comes.
Again, everybody wants to
protect black lives,
and the best way to do that is
for policing
to try to protect inner-city
community from
gun violence.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right. All
right. We do
have to leave it.
BRITTANY PACKNETT: The best way
to do that
is to acknowledge what we live
with every
single day.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right. We
have to leave
it there.
JEFFREY BROWN: Brittany
Packnett, Heather
Mac Donald, thank you both very
much.
BRITTANY PACKNETT: Thank you.
HEATHER MAC DONALD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
drug that's
prompted a record number of
calls to poison
control; the NFL player who gave
up his career
because of concussions; and why
musician Lera
Lynn sings about the darker side
of things.
But, first, as the year comes to
an end, we
thought it would be a good idea
to take stock
and look back at America's
diplomatic accomplishments
and setbacks of 2015.
It was another bloody year
across the Middle
East, in Afghanistan and on the
African continent.
The Syrian civil war entered its
fourth year,
and, in September, Russia
intervened to support
Syria's President Bashar
al-Assad with airstrikes
that mostly hit rebels backed by
the U.S.
and its allies.
Meanwhile, Iraqi government
troops joined
with Kurdish forces, and with
U.S. ground
and air support, began to beat
back Islamic
State fighters. As the year
ended, the Iraqis
were moving to recapture Ramadi.
But ISIS did hold on to much of
its territory
in Syria. And that helped send a
flood of
refugees and migrants from Syria
into Europe,
along with tens of thousands
from Africa and
Asia. Tensions over migrants
crescendoed when
terrorists went on a rampage in
Paris, killing
130 and wounding hundreds more.
Elsewhere, the fighting in
Eastern Ukraine
between Russian-backed
separatists and the
government subsided to some
extent after a
cease-fire agreement was reached
in Minsk,
Belarus. But, in Asia, tensions
rose between
China and the United States and
countries
in the region, as Beijing built
up artificial
islands, complete with military
runways.
Still, there were major
diplomatic agreements
reached in 2015 as well. Iran
agreed to curtail
its nuclear program in exchange
for the lifting
of economic sanctions. The
United States and
Cuba reopened embassies in each
other's capitals
and reestablished diplomatic
relations. Twelve
Pacific Rim countries concluded
the Trans-Pacific
Partnership trade agreement,
which lowers
tariffs; 195 countries struck a
landmark climate
deal in Paris. It aims to cut
manmade emissions
and slow global warming.
And just last week, the U.N.
Security Council
approved a framework for trying
to end the
Syrian civil war.
So, is the U.S. better off from
a national
security perspective than it was
a year ago?
For that, we get the views of
two people with
extensive foreign policy making
experience.
Wendy Sherman was undersecretary
of state
for political affairs during the
Obama administration.
She was the lead U.S. negotiator
to the Iran
nuclear talks, and is now an
adviser to the
Hillary Clinton campaign. And
Richard Haass
served in both Bush
administrations. He's
now the president of the Council
on Foreign
Relations.
And we welcome you both to the
program.
Wendy Sherman, let me start with
you that.
That fundamental question, is
the U.S. better
off today from a national
security perspective?
WENDY SHERMAN, Former U.S.
Undersecretary
of State for Political Affairs:
You know,
Judy, I think, in many ways, we
are, with
one glaring exception, and that
is ISIL and
the terrorist threat. And that's
a glaring
exception because it's created
such anxiety,
and understandably so, among the
American
people.
But our economy is in better
shape. We have
stopped Iran from having a
nuclear weapon.
We have improved our
relationships with Cuba,
which is having a knock-on
effect on Venezuela.
We have created some development
opportunities,
and we have also agreed on TPP,
the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, with 12 countries
in Asia, which
is very critical to our economic
future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I want to
touch on a number
of those, Richard Haass, but the
big picture,
is the U.S. better off?
RICHARD HAASS, President,
Council on Foreign
Relations: Sad to say, I would
say not, in
part because of the things that
have actually
happened -- and Wendy mentioned
them -- the
biggest one, the Middle East,
dwarfs the other
in the immediate effects, and it
also added
to such things as a resurgent
global terrorism,
as well as the refugee flood in
Europe.
And most of the things on the
good side are
still to come. I hope TPP
becomes a reality,
but that depends upon Congress
in 2016. Paris,
the climate change agreement is
more promise
than reality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dealing with the
Islamic State,
Iraq, Syria, how has the
administration done?
RICHARD HAASS: I was critical of
the previous
administration, even though I
was part of
it, for what it did in 2003 in
launching the
Iraq War, and I think that added
to the region's
instability.
And I think what -- largely what
Mr. Obama
has not done, in particular in
Syria, but
also elsewhere in not following
up in Libya
after removing the regime, in
initially saying
all U.S. forces were going to
have to get
out of Afghanistan and taking
U.S. forces
out of Iraq. In many ways, an
overreaction
to the previous American
administration, and
all this coupled with the
pathologies, if
you will, of the region itself
have left the
Middle East overall in some ways
in terrible
shape.
I have compared it to the 30
Years War that
decimated Europe in the 17th
century.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wendy Sherman,
like the 30
Years War?
WENDY SHERMAN: I think we have
to say that
President Obama has all the
right elements
in place.
What we need to do -- what he's
trying to
do is pick up the pace of those
elements,
so whether that's a military
effort. And,
today, we see the Iraqi army
going into Ramadi,
which is very important, to take
that back
from ISIL. We have picked up the
pace on foreign
fighters, on financing, on
attacking oil depots
that ISIL holds on to, looking
at recruitment,
dealing with social media, and
the diplomatic
effort.
We just saw U.N. Security
Council come together
for the first time in a long
time to agree
on a diplomatic way forward. So
we have got
the elements in place, but we
have to pick
up the pace of getting the job
done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Haass,
Afghanistan
is a very different place. But
we also know
that ISIS has some presence
there. How do
you judge the -- the president
has now said
he's going to keep U.S. troops
there longer
than he had said earlier. How do
you see Afghanistan
going?
RICHARD HAASS: Not very well, in
large part
because, as you say, ISIS has
put down a toehold.
You still have the Taliban. They
still enjoy
a sanctuary in Western Pakistan,
which has
really undermined the U.S.
effort for more
than a decade now.
Plus, you got to deal with all
the ethnic
fault lines of Afghanistan's own
politics
and society. And I think again
we hurt ourselves
by raising questions about the
duration of
the American commitment. But I
will be honest
with you, Judy. Even without
such questions,
Afghanistan is just one of the
wrong places
in the world to get overly
ambitious about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You want to
comment?
WENDY SHERMAN: Well, I think the
comment here
is that we should feel good that
Ashraf Ghani
and his CEO, vice president,
Abdullah Abdullah,
have kept it together, that
there is a political
process in place, that there is
a fight that's
going on.
But this is a very tough
long-term effort,
not only in Afghanistan and the
Middle East,
but throughout the world,
because, besides
ISIL, we have -- still have
al-Qaida, AQAP,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab, and we
have got to
make efforts on all of these
places all over
the would, but we can't forget
the good that's
happening, as well as the bad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Wendy
Sherman, you worked,
as we said, for a long time on
this Iran nuclear
deal. We're now in a different
phase of that,
but, at this point, how is it
going?
WENDY SHERMAN: Well, we're
getting to implementation
of the deal.
And we're being very tough about
it. Iran
made specific commitments in
this agreement.
And they have got to follow
through on all
of those commitments. So I think
we are hopeful
the deal will ensure that Iran
cannot get
a nuclear weapon, not for 10
years, not for
15 years, but forever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Haass,
the Iran deal?
RICHARD HAASS: I agree in part
with what Wendy
said, but also disagree.
Where I think it does make
things better is
for the next 10 or 15 years. It
significantly
reduces Iranian capabilities in
the nuclear
area. At the same time, on the
other side
of the ledger, it gives Iran
access to far
more resources than it otherwise
would have
access to, to pursue a foreign
policy that
in many cases is inimical to our
own interests.
And I actually think the biggest
questions
come after the 10- and 15-year
time limits
and dealing with centrifuges and
enriched
uranium. And I just don't think
Wendy or anyone
else can say that we're for sure
or confident
that Iran can't have a nuclear
weapon at that
point. The quantitative and
qualitative limits
come off and we just have to
hope that the
inspections and our willingness
to react,
if indeed we see Iran moving
toward a nuclear
weapon again, that that's
enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I realize
I'm asking
you both to deal with some very
big questions
in a short period of time, but,
Richard Haass,
what about -- and I don't want
to lump them
together, but what about Russia
and China?
These are two big countries,
very different
challenges they pose to the
United States.
But where do you see the U.S.
headed with
these two?
RICHARD HAASS: Difficult
relationships with
both, Judy.
What we're seeing in some ways
is the revival
of elements of great power
politics. And in
both cases, you have leaders,
which worries
me, who are quite unconstrained
by bureaucratic
or organizational factors. They
each have
tremendous freedom of action.
Russia has seems to have moved
somewhat its
focus from playing around in
Ukraine to the
Middle East, and we will just
have to see
whether over time they're
willing to play
a responsible role in taking on
ISIS. So far,
we have not seen much of any of
that. China
continues to try to become more
of a regional
power, and I think, there, the
administration
was right to do the overflights,
to do the
freedom of navigation cruises,
to push back
against China and to reassure
our allies,
in particular Japan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wendy Sherman,
Russia, China?
WENDY SHERMAN: I think these are
going to
be very difficult relationships,
as Richard
says. This is all about really
wary engagement.
These are important powers.
They each have roles, not only
regionally,
but in the world. They're both
permanent members
of the Security Council. They
both have veto
power in the Security Council.
So we're going
to have to deal with them, work
with them
where we can, on climate with
China, on the
Iran deal, and hopefully on
Syria with both
Russia and China.
And where we can't, where Russia
invaded,
Ukraine took -- tried to take
Crimea permanently
into its own orbit, we are going
to have to
be as tough as we are. And we
invoked new
sanctions today yet again on
Russia because
of what they have done in
Ukraine, so wary
engagement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, and very
quickly,
we're going into a presidential
election year.
What do each of you believe you
are most hopeful
about and most worried about
going into this
year.
Wendy Sherman?
WENDY SHERMAN: The American
people are really
hopeful folks, and even though
they are concerned
about this terrorism threat, the
vast majority
of people want to proceed
forward.
They want this economy to
improve. They want
the gap between the rich and the
poor to diminish.
They want to make sure they're
safe and secure,
but they want their kids to have
a better
future. And that's what they
want to be focused
on. So I just hope that the
rhetoric of this
campaign doesn't go out ahead of
where the
American people really are and
what they hope
for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Haass,
finally, 2016?
RICHARD HAASS: Most hopeful that
we can get
passage of the Trans-Pacific
Partnership trade
agreement. Even more than the
economics of
that, Judy, it's strategically
essential,
if America is going to once
again look to
be reliable and predictable.
What I'm most worried about,
there, it's a
long list, beginning obviously
with the Middle
East, but also the levels of
growth around
the world and then always the
possibility
of a surprise. We have not
mentioned North
Korea. We haven't mentioned
Pakistan. We haven't
really talked much about the
possibility of
domestic terrorism.
So, there's a lot of clouds over
the 2016
horizon, unfortunately.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Richard
Haass, Wendy
Sherman, tackling the whole
world for us,
thank you both.
WENDY SHERMAN: Thank you.
RICHARD HAASS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we have
a story on
the rise of the drug synthetic
marijuana,
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we have
a story on
the rise of the drug synthetic
marijuana,
commonly known as Spice or K2.
This year has seen a record
number of calls
to poison control regarding the
substance,
and law enforcement around the
country are
learning how to cope with the
unpredictable,
dangerous drug.
We now learn more about this
deadly cocktail
from "PBS NewsHour"
correspondent William
Brangham.
MAN: Tonight, a local teen's
personal account
of his addiction to the
synthetic drug K2.
MAN: But this legal weed can
have extreme,
dangerous medical side effects.
MOLLY, Used Synthetic Marijuana:
I hit it
two times.
MAN: Wrappers that look just
like this.
MOLLY: And then I don't remember
anything.
WOMAN: Just as dangerous as pot,
cocaine or
meth, but one scary difference:
Your kids
can buy it at local stores.
MOLLY: I remember, I woke up in
the hospital.
My throat hurt so bad, and I was
like, why
is my throat hurting? And that
was because
they had to put a tube down my
throat, because
I couldn't breathe.
WOMAN: Synthetic marijuana.
MOLLY: Then my mom told me what
happened,
and, apparently, I had a seizure
at the park.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Sixteen-year-old Molly is
a resident at the Mountain Manor
Treatment
Center in Baltimore, and she's
here because
of her experience using
so-called synthetic
marijuana, or what they call
fake pot.
MAN: Synthetic marijuana comes
with a quick
and powerful high, but it comes
with a price.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: These drugs
have been in
the news a lot lately, but,
despite their
street name, they're not at all
like actual
marijuana.
DR. KAMA TILLMAN, Howard
University Hospital:
Even that the term says
synthetic marijuana,
it's not marijuana. The effects
are completely
different.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Kama
Tillman works the
emergency room at Howard
University Hospital
in Washington, D.C., and he's
seen a surge
in the number of patients coming
through his
doors suffering ill effects from
these synthetic
drugs.
DR. KAMA TILLMAN: They're
belligerent. They're
wild. Their body's just moving
around, but
they can't control it, and
requires maybe
people to kind of help keep them
calm, so
that they don't harm themselves
or harm anybody
else. You get a lot more people
who get that
agitation, the psychosis, the
paranoia, even
convulsions, and even in some
cases death
from this drug.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There were at
least 15 deaths
from synthetic drugs in the
first five months
of this year, and experts stress
the difficulty
of tracking the harm from these
unfamiliar
substances.
There were also a record number
of calls to
poison control centers, at least
7,000 so
far this year, specifically
related to synthetic
drugs.
DR. MARILYN HUESTIS, National
Institute on
Drug Abuse: I think this is the
emerging face
of drug abuse for the future.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Marilyn
Huestis is a
toxicologist at the National
Institute on
Drug Abuse, and she and her team
study the
chemical makeup of synthetic
drugs.
DR. MARILYN HUESTIS: The big
problem is, new
drugs come out, and they're very
potent, up
to 100 times as potent as
cannabis.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A hundred
times as potent?
DR. MARILYN HUESTIS: Up to. Some
are 50 times.
Some are 100 times, the most
potent ones.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And she says
they're often
made in foreign facilities, with
an ever-changing
cocktail of chemicals.
DR. MARILYN HUESTIS: It's like
taking a 1,000-piece
jigsaw puzzle and throwing it up
in the air
and having to put it back
together without
a picture. That's what we're
trying to do.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Synthetic
marijuana was
originally created for research
purposes in
the 1990s by a chemist named
John Huffman.
But manufacturers soon realized
they could
take Huffman's chemical recipe,
spray it onto
chopped-up plants and then sell
it to consumers.
With brand names like K2, and
Spice and Scooby
Snax, these synthetic drugs were
originally
sold in gas stations and smoke
shops as a
-- quote, unquote -- "legal
alternative" to
marijuana. But as evidence of
the drug's harms
grew, public officials began
cracking down.
Some cities, like Washington,
D.C., have been
revoking the licenses of
retailers caught
selling the drugs. D.C. has also
mounted a
big ad campaign to scare kids
away from the
drugs.
ACTOR: It's like we're a bunch
of lab rats
injecting unknown and harmful
chemicals into
our bodies just to get a quick
high. And they
make a quick profit at our
expense.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Marc
Fishman treats
adolescent addictions at the
Mountain Manor
Center, and he says another
reason why synthetics
took off several years ago is
that they're
hard to detect.
DR. MARC FISHMAN, Mountain Manor
Treatment
Center: One of the issues that I
am sure you
have heard is that they don't
show up well
in urine drug tests. So, one of
the advantages
to some people is that they can
get away with
it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You can get
high and not
get busted.
DR. MARC FISHMAN: Get high and
not busted.
Some of the kids will call it
probation weed.
GARRETT, MD-BO/Used Synthetic
Marijuana:
I first heard about it in high
school. So,
my buddies were doing it, and I
was smoking
weed at the time, so they told
me that there
was something called synthetic
weed that didn't
come up on like drug tests. My
parents were
always on me. So, I remember the
first time
I tried it, I was in my buddy's
basement,
and you know, just -- it made me
crazy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Fishman
says that this
puzzling mix of chemicals, while
alarming
to researchers, can actually be
appealing
to adolescents.
DR. MARC FISHMAN: So, telling a
young person,
you don't know what you're
getting, be careful,
your brain might explode,
doesn't change the
momentary thrill seeking where
they're so...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That may sound
like a pitch
for the drug.
DR. MARC FISHMAN: Exactly,
exactly.
MOLLY: I didn't look it up. I
didn't search
about it. I was like, this is
going to get
me high. That's -- that's really
all you're
thinking about.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The spread of
synthetics
has also caused challenges for
law enforcement.
Andrew Struhar is acting
lieutenant of the
narcotics unit of the
Washington, D.C., police.
LT. ANDREW STRUHAR, Washington,
D.C., Police
Department: Two, three years
ago, this was
a legal substance, you know.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You could just
buy it in
a store.
LT. ANDREW STRUHAR: And it
wasn't scheduled
by the federal government, so,
therefore,
it wasn't a narcotic, really. It
had a narcotic
effect, but it was legal to
purchase, legal
to possess, legal to use.
And, you know, a lot of
agencies, whether
they be regulatory, law
enforcement or in
government legislature, are
trying to catch
up with, you know, what these
products are.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All 50 states
have now outlawed
synthetic drugs in some way, but
the problem
is, manufacturers keep changing
the chemical
makeup of the drugs to try and
skirt the laws
and claim their products aren't
technically
illegal. It becomes this
never-ending cat-and-mouse
game.
Now, look, this one says,
complies with Senate
Bill 3187 and House Bill 1175,
legal schedule.
This is claiming it's legal.
LT. ANDREW STRUHAR: Right. And
they do it
typically on the back, as you
can see on the
back. They go through all their
disclaimers,
and it says right on there
disclaimer. And
if you look at...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: "Sold as
incense only, not
for human consumption."
LT. ANDREW STRUHAR: It's
designed specifically
for aromatic potpourri use. I
mean, nobody
sells potpourri in 3.5 gram
packets.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's not just
individual
sales. In a sign of the growing
scale of these
operations, officials in
Washington, D.C.,
recently seized 265 pounds of
synthetics from
a D.C. warehouse. It was one of
the biggest
busts of its kind, a total
street value of
$2.3 million, according to
police.
And as this formerly legal drug
retreats underground,
those who use it have also been
changing.
Police and clinicians note an
apparent decrease
in use among young and
middle-class users,
and a rise among vulnerable
groups like the
poor and the homeless, proof to
experts that
the threat of these drugs is far
from over
and the dangers still unknown.
DR. MARILYN HUESTIS: It's a
major problem.
And we don't know. All these
people who are
trying this now, what is this
doing to their
brains? What's it going to be
like in five
years, 10 years?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Because we
just don't know
the answers to those...
DR. MARILYN HUESTIS: We don't
know. We don't
know. We don't have the
beginning of answers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Meanwhile, the
questions
just continue to pile up.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Washington, D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: the risks of
concussion
and long-term brain injury from
football.
It is a subject that looms large
in a sport
that's arguably become the
national pastime,
and it is very much back in the
news as the
film "Concussion" opens later
this week.
Tonight, "Frontline" has updated
its two-hour
special "League of Denial." It
includes a
new interview with a former
linebacker and
emerging star in the NFL who
captured attention
when he walked away from the
game.
Here's a look at some of
"Frontline"'s new
reporting about Borland.
NARRATOR: NFL star Chris Borland
was known
as a fearless player, but after
one season,
he quit because he was afraid of
head injuries.
CHRIS BORLAND, Former National
Football League
Player: I couldn't really
justify playing
for money, and I think what I
wanted to achieve
put me at too great of a risk,
so I just decided
on another profession.
NARRATOR: Now Borland is called
the most dangerous
man in football, a powerful
symbol of the
NFL's growing concussion crisis.
CHRIS NOWINSKI, Executive
Director, Concussion
Legacy Foundation: If the NFL is
smart, they're
scared of Chris Borland and the
people that
will come after them.
NARRATOR: Like so many young
kids in America,
Borland grew up loving football.
CHRIS BORLAND: In a lot of ways,
I was born
into football. I knew it was
what I was going
to do. I loved it and stuck with
it and realized
my dream.
NARRATOR: In high school, his
climb to the
NFL began on YouTube.
MAN: Chris Borland with a diving
tackle.
NARRATOR: The hit went viral.
Borland was
on his way to big-time college
football. The
University of Wisconsin's
promotional highlights
showcase number 44, Chris
Borland's aggressive
hits. After four seasons, pay
dirt.
MAN: The San Francisco 49ers
select Chris
Borland.
CHRIS BORLAND: It was a dream
come true. I
can remember my brothers jumping
up and hugging
me. And it's surreal to see your
anymore across
the ticker and the analysts
start to talk
about you, and you're playing in
the NFL.
NARRATOR: The 49ers gave him the
number 50
jersey, a four-year contract
worth nearly
$3 million, and a signing bonus
worth more
than $600,000.
STEVE FAINARU, ESPN: He was just
a heat-seeking
missile, this guy. He was
looking at a long-term
career. Yes, he was looking at
everything
that the NFL brings you.
NARRATOR: But, as Borland was
becoming a star,
the NFL's concussion crisis was
hard to ignore.
STEVE FAINARU: He began the
think about all
the violence that he was
inflicting and experiencing,
and I think he found that
morally troublesome.
NARRATOR: He began reading
everything he could
about the effects of football on
his brain.
CHRIS BORLAND: I knew of CTE. I
didn't know
what the acronym stood for. I
started with
Google searches. I started
looking at things.
What does this term mean? Where
is the research
done?
NARRATOR: What he learned
terrified him.
CHRIS BORLAND: It's tough. I
mean, I -- you
understand on a certain level
what you're
doing, but you don't know the
science behind
it.
NARRATOR: Borland then went even
further.
He called a leading brain
scientist at Boston
University.
DR. ROBERT STERN, Boston
University CTE Center:
And, in football, one has to
expect that almost
every play of every game and
every practice,
they're going to be hitting
their heads against
each other. Each time that
happens, it's around
20 g or more. That's the
equivalent of driving
a car at 35 miles per hour into
a brick wall
1,000, 1,500 times per year.
NARRATOR: After that call, that
very day,
Borland retired.
CHRIS BORLAND: The idea that
just the basis
of the game, repetitive hits,
bring on a cascade
of issues later in life, that
changed the
game for me.
NARRATOR: Borland's decision to
leave the
nation's most powerful sports
league instantly
made headlines.
MAN: San Francisco 49ers
linebacker Chris
Borland has...
WOMAN: Retired from NFL due to
concussion
concerns.
STEVE FAINARU: This was a
massive blow. The
profound act of an NFL player
walking away
from $3 million and fame and a
chance to play
professional football, it's just
incalculable.
NARRATOR: At NFL headquarters,
they responded
immediately. Commissioner Roger
Goodell himself
hit the airwaves to defend the
game.
ROGER GOODELL, National Football
League Commissioner:
I think our game has never been
more exciting.
It's never been more
competitive. And I don't
think it's ever been safer.
CHRIS BORLAND: It's dishonest,
and I don't
think it's responsible to say
that the game
is safer. I think that's just
not true, and
the players themselves on the
field know -- I
mean, they scoff at that. That's
not accurate.
NARRATOR: It's been a year since
he walked
away, the first fall in 10 years
Chris Borland
hasn't suited up.
CHRIS BORLAND: Last year, the
NFL commissioned
actuaries to estimate how many
NFL veterans
would have brain damage, and the
number they
came up with was three out of
10. So, if I
turn on a game and a third of
the guys will
have brain damage in life, I
just -- I can't
really support that.
And I just don't really watch
football anymore.
If it's on, I may peek at it,
but I don't...
JUDY WOODRUFF: "Frontline" did
ask the NFL
for a response.
In a statement, the league said
-- quote -- "We
respect Chris Borland's decision
and wish
him all the best. Playing any
sport is a personal
decision. By any measure,
football has never
been safer. And we continue to
make progress
with rule changes, safer
tackling techniques
and better equipment, protocols
and medical
care for players. Player safety
will be our
top priority."
And a reminder: You can watch
"Frontline"
tonight, right here on your PBS
station.
Tomorrow night, we will have a
report on the
coming feature film "Concussion"
and the true
story behind it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
a new occasional
series here on the "NewsHour"
that gives artists
an opportunity to talk about
their work. We
call it My Music.
We start with Lera Lynn, an
up-and-coming
singer-songwriter featured in
the HBO series
"True Detective" who recently
completed her
U.S. tour.
Take
a listen:
LERA LYNN, Musician: There is
something really
attractive about darkness to me.
LERA LYNN, Musician: There is
something really
attractive about darkness to me.
I have read studies that
listening to sad
music actually creates positive
emotion, so
I'm just trying to change the
world.
(LAUGHTER)
LERA LYNN: Just kidding.
LERA LYNN: My name is Lera Lynn.
And I'm an
independent musician.
A lot of people that come into
the shows these
days have find out about me
through "True
Detective." Thankfully, they
have dug a little
bit more. I think that's the
best possible
Detective." Thankfully, they
have dug a little
bit more. I think that's the
best possible
scenario for me.
My family is Texan. And I think,
especially
now, I'm really starting to feel
the impact
of their upbringing on me,
because it's coming
out of the music in a big way.
There's been
of their upbringing on me,
because it's coming
out of the music in a big way.
There's been
a lot of country music, a lot of
classic rock,
even jazz. My mom loved Joni
Mitchell.
There was even, you know, a lot
of Van Halen
in the house.
(LAUGHTER)
LERA LYNN: It is kind of all
over the place,
really. I think that's got a lot
to do with
why my style varies such a great
deal.
The opening track from my latest
record, "The
Avenues," is called "Out to
Sea." And I had
a friend whose roommate had a
girlfriend who
was in love with him, and he was
really not
very into. And he broke it off
with her, and
she just couldn't bear it.
She told us all, since we were a
group of
friends, that she had been
diagnosed with
ovarian cancer. We were all very
shocked and
saddened by the news and later
found out that
ovarian cancer. We were all very
shocked and
saddened by the news and later
found out that
it was, in fact, a lie, and just
a means to
keep this guy close to her.
So, in the interim, the news and
the truth,
I wrote "Out to Sea," which it's
about facing
death, you know, facing your
mortality. Of
course, we have paired it with a
major key
and an upbeat track, so it's not
as lonely
as it might seem.
(LAUGHTER)
LERA LYNN: If you're trying to
get into songwriting
and you're intimidated by it,
know that everyone
is at first, and that you just
have to jump.
Nobody ever has to hear it or
read your lyrics
or anything. You just got to
write and keep
writing and let inspiration and
your own artistic
voice drive you.
writing and let inspiration and
your own artistic
voice drive you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: It
is apparently a misconception
that the holidays
are a bad time to search for a
job. If you're
ready to make a change, don't
sit out the
two weeks before new year, says
our jobs guru
in this week's Ask the
Headhunter column,
which you can find on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, we will look at
Islam in America
through the eyes of two Muslim
women.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.